rtio: Real-Time Stream and Sensor API (#17434)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/reference/peripherals/rtio.rst

.. _rtio_interface:

Real-Time IO
############

The real-time I/O or RTIO subsystem exposes an API for efficiently
moving information in a latency and processing friendly way, between
a Zephyr application and external I2C or SPI devices (such as sensors).

Overview
********

RTIO provides an API for allocating and describing continguous blocks of
memory as well as an API for sourcing these blocks from a physical device.

Blocks, defined by :c:type:`struct rtio_block`, provide the unit of data

> being transferred. These blocks contain a byte layout identifier provided by

Reviewer: Fair enough

> being transferred. These blocks contain a byte layout identifier provided by

Reviewer: I've added some descriptions and intended use case for the metadata here

the source of the block, timestamps for when the block
began and finished being created, as well as the length and size in bytes.

Blocks are used to allow for simple DMA transfers as well as controlling the
latency between a source and sink.

Sources can be sensors such has a high rate accelerometer, gyro, or
magnetometer. In these cases the driver will typically provide blocks
encoded in the sensors native format which is often times the most compact
representation.

Intermediary processing steps representing both sinks and sources of data are

> also possible. One possible task is taking the raw byte layout coming from a

Reviewer: > > I will probably propose what that looks like in another commit in this same PR?
> 
> +1, that would really clear things up for me.

https://github.com/bfrog/zephyr/pull/1 has the beginnings of what I had in mind

single-input single-output queue of blocks.

Blocks, defined by :c:type:`struct rtio_block`, provide the unit of data
being transferred through a pipe. These blocks contain a byte layout
identifier provided by the source of the block, timestamps for when the block
began and finished being created, as well as length and size in bytes.

Blocks are used to allow for simple DMA transfers as well as controlling the
latency between a source and sink.

Sources can be sensors such has a high rate accelerometer, gyro, or
magnetometer. In these cases the driver will typically provide blocks
encoded in the sensors native format which is often times the most compact
representation.

Intermediary processing steps representing both sinks and sources of data are
also possible. One common task is taking the raw byte layout coming from a
device such as a 9-DoF intertial motion sensors and converting it to SI units
with common numerical formats for that sensor kind. Several processing steps
might be connected together. Taking the above example of getting a common
9-DoF SI data stream could be used to determine an earth orientation vector
using sensor fusion.

> The RTIO subsystem lets you both efficiently move data around and

Reviewer 2: Thanks for this documentation. It would be nice to add a few sentences about triggers to this.

Reviewer: Definitely, I have some function comments on rtio_trigger but nothing in the general docs explaining what its there for.

.. _rtio_interface:

Real-Time IO
############

> The real-time io or rtio subsystem exposes an API for efficiently

Reviewer 3: Some capitalization and grammar tweaks:
```
The real-time I/O or RTIO subsystem exposes an API for efficiently
moving information in a latency and processing friendly
way, between a Zephyr application and external I2C or SPI devices
(such as sensors).
```

moving information to/from external i2c/spi devices such as sensors
to/from a zephyr application in a latency and processing friendly
way.

Overview
********

RTIO provides two significant C structures and APIs for moving bytes around

> efficiently, blocks and pipes.

Reviewer 3: Change this to match the order of the explanations below:
```
efficiently, using pipes and blocks.
```

Pipes are used to move blocks in a safe, and pollable manner from a source to
a sink of data. Effectively a pipe is a single-input single-output queue of
blocks.

A :c:type:`struct rtio_block` provides the unit of data being transferred
through a :c:type:`struct rtio_pipe`. These blocks contain a byte layout
identifier provided by the source of the block, timestamps for when the block
began and finished being used, as well as length and size in bytes.

Blocks are used to allow for simple DMA transfers as well as controlling the
latency between a source and sink.

Sources can be sensors such has a high rate accelerometer, gyro, or
magnetometer. In these cases the driver will typically provide blocks
encoded in the sensors native format which is often times the most compact
representation.

A sink may also be a source if it involves some processing. One common task is
taking the raw byte layout coming from a device such as a 9-DoF intertial motion
sensors and converting it to SI units with common numerical formats for that
sensor kind.

> Potentially leading to other processing steps, perhaps to determine a gravity

Reviewer 3: Delete the blank line above this so it doesn't start another paragraph and rewrite as:
```suggestion
That could then lead to other processing steps, perhaps to determine a gravity
```

vector, or orientation relative to earth.

> RTIO is meant to be useful in not only efficiently moving data around, but

Reviewer 3: Simplify this with:
```
The RTIO subsystem lets you both efficiently move data around and
efficiently process chunks of data at a time.
```
